The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill


Book 2, Chapter 8

Of Metayers

    1. From the case in which the produce of land and labour
belongs undividedly to the labourer, we proceed to the cases in
which it is divided, but between two classes only, the labourers
and the landowners: the character of capitalists merging in the
one or the other, as the case may be. It is possible indeed to
conceive that there might be only two classes of persons to share
the produce, and that a class of capitalists might be one of
them; the character of labourer and that of landowner being
united to form the other. This might occur in two ways. The
labourers, though owning the land, might let it to a tenant, and
work under him as hired servants. But this arrangement, even in
the very rare cases which could give rise to it, would not
require any particular discussion, since it would not differ in
any material respect from the threefold system of labourers,
capitalists, and landlords. The other case is the not uncommon
one, in which a peasant proprietor owns and cultivates the land,
but rises the little capital required, by a mortgage upon it.
Neither does this case present any important peculiarity. There
is but one person, the peasant himself, who has any right or
power of interference in the management. He pays a fixed annuity
as interest to a capitalist, as he pays another fixed sum in
taxes to the government. Without dwelling further on these cases,
we pass to those which present marked features of peculiarity.
    When the two parties sharing in the produce are the labourer
or labourers and the landowner, it is not a very material
circumstance in the case, which of the two furnishes the stock,
or whether, as sometimes happens, they furnish it, in a
determinate proportion, between them. The essential difference
does not lie in this, but in another circumstance, namely,
whether the division of the produce between the two is regulated
by custom or by competition. We will begin with the former case;
of which the metayer culture is the principal, and in Europe
almost the sole, example.
    The principle of the metayer system, is that the labourer, or
peasant, makes his engagement directly with the landowner, and
pays, not a fixed rent, either in money or in kind, but a certain
proportion of the produce, or rather of what remains of the
produce after deducting what is considered necessary to keep up
the stock. The proportion is usually, as the name imports,
one-half; but in several districts in Italy it is two-thirds.
Respecting the supply of stock, the custom varies from place to
place; in some places the landlord furnishes the whole, in others
half, in others some particular part, as for instance the cattle
and seed, the labourer providing the implements.(1*) "This
connexion," says Sismondi, speaking chiefly of Tuscany,(2*) "is
often the subject of a contract, to define certain services and
certain occasional payments to which the metayer binds himself;
nevertheless the differences in the obligations of one such
contract and another are inconsiderable; usage governs alike all
these engagements, and supplies the stipulations which have not
been expressed; and the landlord who attempted to depart from
usage, who exacted more than his neighbour, who took for the
basis of the agreement anything but the equal division of the
crops, would render himself so odious, he would be so sure of not
obtaining a metayer who was an honest man, that the contract of
all the metayers may be considered as identical, at least in each
province, and never gives rise to any competition among peasants
in search of employment, or any offer to cultivate the soil on
cheaper terms than one another." To the same effect
Châteauvieux,(3*) speaking of the metayers of Piedmont. "They
consider it," (the farm) "as a patrimony, and never think of
renewing the lease, but go on from generation to generation, on
the same terms, without writings or registries."(4*)

    2. When the partition of the produce is a matter of fixed
usage, not of varying convention, political economy has no laws
of distribution to investigate. It has only to consider, as in
the case of peasant proprietors, the effects of the system first
on the condition of the peasantry, morally and physically, and
secondly, on the efficiency of the labour. In both these
particulars the metayer system has the characteristic advantages
of peasant properties, but has them in a less degree. The metayer
has less motive to exertion than the peasant proprietor, since
only half the fruits of his industry, instead of the whole, are
his own. But he has a much stronger motive than a day labourer,
who has no other interest in the result than not to be dismissed.
If the metayer cannot be turned out except for some violation of
his contract, he has a stronger motive to exertion than any
tenant-farmer who has not a lease. The metayer is at least his
landlord's partner, and a half-sharer in their joint gains.
Where, too, the permanence of his tenure is guaranteed by custom,
he acquires local attachments, and much of the feelings of a
proprietor. I am supposing that this half produce is sufficient
to yield him a comfortable support. Whether it is so, depends (in
any given state of aciculture) on the deCee of subdivision of the
land; which depends on the operation of the population principle.
A multiplication of people, beyond the number that can be
properly supported on the land or taken off by manufactures, is
incident even to a peasant proprietary, and of course not less
but rather more incident to a metayer population. The tendency,
however, which we noticed in the proprietary system, to promote
prudence on this point, is in no small degree common to it with
the metayer system. There, also, it is a matter of easy and exact
calculation whether a family can he supported or not. If it is
easy to see whether the owner of the whole produce can increase
the production so as to maintain a greater number of persons
equally well, it is a not less simple problem whether the owner
of half the produce can do so.(5*) There is one check which this
system seems to offer, over and above those held out even by the
proprietary system; there is a landlord, who may exert a
controlling power, by refusing his consent to a subdivision. I do
not, however, attach great importance to this check, because the
farm may be loaded with superfluous hands without being
subdivided; and because, so long as the increase of hands
increases the gross produce, which is almost always the case, the
landlord, who receives half the produce, is an immediate gainer,
the inconvenience falling only on the labourers. The landlord is
no doubt liable in the end to suffer from their poverty, by being
forced to make advances to them, especially in bad seasons; and a
foresight of this ultimate inconvenience may operate beneficially
on such landlords as prefer future security to present profit.
    The characteristic disadvantage of the metayer system is very
fairly stated by Adam Smith. After pointing out that metayers
"have a plain interest that the whole produce should be as great
as possible, in order that their own proportion may be so," he
continues,(6*) "it could never, however, be the interest of this
species of cultivators to lay out, in the further improvement of
the land, any part of the little stock which they might save from
their own share of the produce, because the lord who laid out
nothing, was to get one-half of whatever it produced. The tithe,
which is but a tenth of the produce, is found to be a very great
hindrance to improvement. A tax, therefore, which amounted to
one-half, must have been an effectual bar to it. It might be the
interest of a metayer to make the land produce as much as could
be brought out of it by means of the stock, but it could never be
his interest to mix any furnished by the proprietor; part of his
own with it. In France, where five parts out of six of the whole
kingdom are said to be still occupied by this species of
cultivators, the proprietors complain that their metayers take
every opportunity of employing the master's cattle rather in
carriage than in cultivation; because in the one case they get
the whole profits to themselves, in the other they share them
with their landlord."
    It is indeed implied in the very nature of the tenure, that
all improvements which require expenditure of capital must be
made with the capital of the landlord. This, however, is
essentially the case even in England, whenever the farmers are
tenants-at-will: or (if Arthur Young is right) even on a "nine
years' lease." If the landlord is willing to provide capital for
improvements, the metayer has the strongest interest in promoting
them, since half the benefit of them will accrue to himself. As
however the perpetuity of tenure which, in the case we are
discussing, he enjoys by custom, renders his consent a necessary
condition; the spirit of routine, and dislike of innovation,
characteristic of an agricultural people when not corrected by
education, are no doubt, as the advocates of the system seem to
admit, a serious hindrance to improvement.

    3. The metayer system has met with no mercy from English
authorities. "There is not one word to be said in favour of the
practice," says Arthur Young,(7*) and a "thousand arguments that
might be used against it. The hard plea of necessity can alone be
urged in its favour; the poverty of the farmers being so ceat,
that the landlord must stock the farm, or it could not be stocked
at all: this is a most cruel burden to a proprietor, who is thus
obliged to run much of the hazard of farming in the most
dangerous of all methods, that of trusting his property
absolutely in the hands of people who are generally ignorant,
many careless, and some undoubtedly wicked.... In this most
miserable of all the modes of letting land, the defrauded
landlord redeives a contemptible rent; the farmer is in the
lowest state of poverty; the land is miserably cultivated; and
the nation suffers as severely as the parties themselves....
Wherever(8*) this system prevails, it may be taken for granted
that a useless and miserable population is found.... Wherever the
country (that I saw) is poor and unwatered, in the Milanese, it
is in the hands of metayers:" they are almost always in debt to
their landlord for seed or food, and "their condition is more
wretched than that of a day labourer.... There (9*) are but few
districts" (in Italy) "where lands are let to the occupying
tenant at a money-rent; but wherever it is found, their crops are
greater; a clear proof of the imbecility of the metaying system."
"Wherever it" (the metayer system) "has been adopted," says Mr.
M'Culloch, (10*) "it has put a stop to all improvement, and has
reduced the cultivators to the most abject poverty" Mr.
Jones(11*) shares the common opinion, and quotes Turgot and
Destutt-Tracy in support of it. The impression, however, of all
these writers (notwithstanding Arthur Young's occasional
references to Italy) seems to be chiefly derived from France, and
France before the Revolution.(12*) Now the situation of French
metayers under the old régime by no means represents the typical
form of the contract. It is essential to that form, that the
proprietor pays all the taxes. But in France the exemption of the
noblesse from direct taxation had led the Government to throw the
whole hurthen of their ever-increasing fiscal exactions upon the
occupiers: and it is to these exactions that Turgot ascribed the
extreme wretchedness of the metayers: a wretchedness in some
cases so excessive, that in Limousin and Angounmois (the
provinces which he administered) they had seldom more, according
to him, after deducting all burthens, than from twenty-five to
thirty livres (20 to 24 shillings) per head for their whole
annual consumption: "je ne dis pas en argent, mais en comptant
tout ce qu'ils consomment en nature sur ce qu'ils ont
récolté."(13*) When we add that they had not the virtual fixity
of tenure of the metayers of Italy, ("in Limousin," says Arthur
Young,(14*) "the metayers are considered as little better than
menial servants, removable at pleasure, and obliged to conform in
all things to the will of the landlords,") it is evident that
their case affords no argument against the metayer system in its
better form. A population who could call nothing their own, who,
like the Irish cottiers, could not in any contingency be worse
off, had nothing to restrain them from multiplying, and
subdividing the land, until stopped by actual starvation.
    We shall find a very different picture, by the most accurate
authorities, of the metayer cultivation of Italy. In the first
place, as to subdivision. In Lombardy, according to
Châteauvieux,(15*) there are few farms which exceed fifty acres,
and few which have less than ten. These farms are all occupied by
metayers at half profit. They invariably display "an extent(16*)
and a richness in buildings rarely known in any other country in
Europe." Their plan "affords the greatest room with the least
extent of building; is best adapted to arrange and secure the
crop; and is, at the same time, the most economical, and the
least exposed to accidents hy fire." The court-yard "exhibits a
whole so regular and commodious, and a system of such care and
good order, and that our dirty and ill-arranged farms can convey
no adequate idea of." The same description applies to Piedmont.
The rotation of crops is excellent. "I should think(17*) no
country can bring so large a portion of its produce to market as
Piedmont." Though the soil is not naturally very fertile, "the
number of cities is prodigiously great." The agriculture must,
therefore, be eminently favourable to the net as well as to the
gross produce of tlhe land. "Each plough works thirty-two acres
in the season.... Nothng can be more perfect or neater than the
hoeing and moulding up the maize, when in full growth, by a
single plough, with a pair of oxen, without injury to a single
plant, while all the weeds are effectually destroyed." So much
for agricultural skill. "Nothing can be so excellent as the crop
which precedes and that which follows it." The wheat "is thrashed
by a cylinder, drawn hy a horse, and guided by a boy, while the
labourers turn over the straw with forks. This process lasts
nearly a fortnight; it is quick and economical, and completely
gets out the grain..... In no part of the world are the economy
and the management of the land better understood than in
Piedmont, and this explains the phenomenon of its great
population, and immense export of provisions." All this under
metayer cultivation.
    Of the valley of the Arno, in its whole extent, both above
and below Florence, the same writer thus speaks:(18*) -- "Forests
of olive-trees covered the lower parts of the mountains, and by
their foliage concealed an infinite number of small farms, which
peopled these parts of the mountains; chestnut-trees raised their
heads on the higher slopes, their healthy verdure contrasting
with the pale tint of the olive-trees, and spreading a brightness
over this amphitheatre. The road was bordered on each side with
villagehouses, not more than a hundred paces from each other.....
They are placed at a little distance from the road, and separated
from it by a wall, and a terrace of some feet in extent. On the
wall are commonly placed many vases of antique forms, in which
flowers, aloes, and young orange-trees are growing. The house
itself is completely covered with vines...... Before these houses
we saw groups of peasant females dressed in white linen, silk
corsets, and straw-hats, ornamented with flowers..... These
houses being so near each other, it is evident that the land
annexed to them must be small, and that property, in these
valleys, must be very much divided; the extent of these domains
being from three to ten acres. The land lies round the houses,
and is divided into fields by small canals, or rows of trees,
some of which are mulberry-trees, but the greatest number
poplars, the leaves of which are eaten by the cattle. Each tree
supports a vine..... These divisions, arrayed in oblong squares,
are large enough to be cultivated by a plough without wheels, and
a pair of oxen. There is a pair of oxen between ten or twelve of
the farmers; they employ them successively in the cultivation of
all the farms..... Almost every farm maintains a well-looking
horse, which goes in a small two-wheeled cart, neatly made, and
painted red; they serve for all the purposes of draught for the
farm, and also to convey the farmer's daughters to mass and to
balls. Thus, on holidays, hundreds of these little carts are seen
flying in all directions, Carrying the young women, decorated
with flowers and ribbons."
    This is not a picture of poverty; and so far as agriculture
is concerned, it effectually redeems metayer cultivation, as
existing in these countries, from the reproaches of English
writers; but with respect to the condition of the cultivators,
Châteauvieux's testimony is, in some points, not so favourable.
"It is(19*) neither the natural fertility of the soil, nor the
abundance which strikes the eye of the traveller, which
constitute the well-being of its inhabitants. It is the number of
individuals among whom the total produce is divided, which fixes
the portion that each is enabled to enjoy. Here it is very small.
I have thus far, indeed, exhibited a delightful country, well
watered, fertile, and covered with a perpetual vegetation; I have
shown it divided into countless enclosures, which, like so many
beds in a garden, display a thousand varying productions; I have
shown, that to all these enclosures are attached well-built
houses, clothed with vines, and decorated with flowers; but, on
entering them, we find a total want of all the conveniences of
life, a table more than frugal, and a general appearance of
privation." Is not Châteauvieux here unconsciously contrasting
the condition of the metayers with that of the farmers of other
countries, when the proper standard with which to compare it is
that of the acicultural day-labourers?
    Arthur Young says,(20*) "I was assured that these metayers
are (especially near florence) much at their ease; that on
holidays they are dressed remarkably well, and not without
objects of luxury, as silver, gold, and silk; and live well, on
plenty of bread, wine, and legumes. In some instances this may
possibly be the case, but the general fact is contrary. It is
absurd to think that metayers, upon such a farm as is cultivated
by a pair of oxen, can live at their ease; and a clear proof of
their poverty is this, that the landlord, who provides half the
live stock, is often obliged to lend the peasant money to procure
his half..... The metayers, not in the vicinity of the city, are
so poor, that landlords even lend them corn to eat: their food is
black bread, made of a mixture with vetches; and their drink is
very little wine, mixed with water, and called aquarolle; meat on
Sundays only; their dress very ordinary." Mr. Jones admits the
superior comfort of the metayers near Florence, and attributes it
partly to straw-platting, by which the women of the peasantry can
earn, according to Châteauvieux,(21*) from fifteen to twenty
pence a day. But even this fact tells in favour of the metayer
system: for in those parts of England in which either
straw-platting or lace-making is carried on by the women and
children of the labouring class, as in Bedfordshire and
Buckinghamshire, the condition of the class is not better, but
rather worse than elsewhere, the wages of agricultural labour
being depressed by a full equivalent.
    In spite of Châteauvieux's statement respecting the poverty
of the metayers, his opinion, in respect to Italy at least, is
given in favour of the system. "It occupies(22*) and constantly
interests the proprietors, which is never the case with great
proprietors who lease their estates at fixed rents. It
establishes a community of interests, and relations of kindness
between the proprietors and the metayers; a kindness which I have
often witnessed, and from which result great advantages in the
moral condition of society. The proprietor, under this system,
always interested in the success of the crop never refuses to
make an advance upon it, which the land promises to repay with
interest. It is by these advances and by the hope thus inspired,
that the rich proprietors of land have cadually perfected the
whole rural economy of Italy. It is to them that it owes the
numerous systems of irrigation which water its soil, as also the
establishment of the terrace culture on the hills: gradual but
permanent improvements, which common peasants, for want of means,
could never have affected, and which could never have been
accomplished by the farmers, nor by the ceat proprietors who let
their estates at fixed rents, because they are not sufficiently
interested. Thus the interested system forms of itself that
alliance between the rich proprietor, whose means provide for the
improvement of the culture, and the metayer whose care and labour
are directed, by a common interest, to make the most of these
advances."
    But the testimony most favourable to the system is that of
Sismondi, which has the advantage of being specific, and from
accurate knowledge; his information being not that of a
traveller, but of a resident proprietor, intimately acquainted
with rural life. His statements apply to Tuscany generally, and
more particularly to the Val di Nievole, in which his own
property lay, and which is not within the supposed privileged
circle immediately round Florence. It is one of the districts in
which the size of farms appears to be the smallest. The following
is his description of the dwellings and mode of life of the
metayers of that district.(23*)
    "Cette maison, bâtie en bonnes murailles à chaux et à ciment,
a toujours au moins un étage, quelquefois deux, au-dessus du
rez-de-chaussée. Le plus souvent on trouve à ce rez-de-chaussée
la cuisine, une étable pour deux bêtes à corne, et le magasin,
qui prend son nom, tinaia, des grandes cuves (tini) où l'on fait
fermenter le vin, sans le soumettre au pressoir: c'est là encore
que le métayer enferme sous clé ses tonneaux, son huile, et son
blé. Presque toujours il possède encore un hangar appuyé contre
la maison, pour qu'il puisse y travailler à couvert à raccommoder
ses outils, ou à hacher le fourrage pour son bétail. Au premier
et au second étage sont deux, trois, et souvent quatre chambres à
lit.... La plus spacieuse et la mieux aérée de ces chambres est
en général destinée par le métayer, pendant les mois de Mai et de
Juin, à l'éducation des vers à soie: de grands coffres pour
enfermer les habits et le linge, et quelques chaises de bois,
sont les principaux meubles de ces chambres; mais une nouvelle
épouse y apporte toujours sa commode de bois de noyer. Les lits
sont sans rideaux, sans tour de lit; mais sur chacun, outre un
bon garde-paille rempli de la paille élastique du blé de Turquie,
On voit un ou deux matelas en laine, ou, chez les plus pauvres,
en étoupe, une bonne couverture piquée, des draps de forte toile
de chanvre, et sur le meilleur lit de la famille, un tapis de
bourre de soie qu'on étale les jours de fête. Il n'y a de
cheminée qu'à la cuisine; dans la même pièce on trouve toujours
la grande table de bois où dîne la famille, avec ses bancs; le
grand coffre, qui sert en même temps d'armoire pour conserver le
pain et les provisions, et de pétrin; un assortiment assez
complet et fort peu coûteux de pots, de plats et d'assiettes en
terre cuite; une ou deux lampes de laiton, un poids à la romaine,
et au moins deux cruches en cuivre rouge pour puiser et pour
conserver l'eau. Tout le linge et tous les habits de travail de
la famille ont été filés par les femmes de la maison. Ces habits,
tant pour les hommes que pour les femmes, sont de l'étoffe qu'ils
nomment mezza lana si elle est épaisse, mola si elle est légere.
La trame est un gros fil ou de chanvre ou d'étoupe, le
remplissage est de laine ou de coton; elle est teinte par les
mêmes paysannes qui l'ont filée. On se figurerait difficilement
combien, par un travail assidu, les paysannes savent accumuler et
de toile et de mezza lana; combien de draps se trouvent au dépôt
commun: comhien chaque membre de la famille a de chemises, de
vestes, de pantalons, de jupons, et de robes. Pour le faire
comprendre, nous joignons en note une partie de l'inventaire de
la famille de paysans que nous connaissons le mieux; elle n'est
ni parmi les plus pauvres ni parmi les plus riches, et elle vit
heureuse par son travail sur la moitié des récoltes de moins de
dix arpens de terre. (24*) Cette épouse avait eu 50 écus de dot,
dont 20 payés comptant, et le reste à terme, à 2 écus par année.
L'écu de Toscane vaut 6 francs. La dot la plus commune pour les
paysannes, dans le reste de la Toscane où les métairies sont plus
grandes, est de 100 écus, 600 francs."
    Is this poverty, or consistent with poverty? When a common,
M. de Sismondi even says the common, marriage portion of a
metayer's daughter is 24l. English money, equivalent to at least
50l. in Italy and in that rank of life; when one whose dowry is
only half that amount, has the wardrobe described, which is
represented by Sismondi as a fair average; the class must be
fully comparable, in general condition, to a large proportion
even of capitalist farmers in other countries; and incomparably
above the daylabourers of any country, except a new colony, or
the United States. Very little can be inferred, against such
evidence, from a traveller's impression of the poor quality of
their food. Its unexpensive character may be rather the effect of
economy than of necessity. Costly feeding is not the favourite
luxury of a southern people; their diet in all classes is
principally vegetable, and no peasantry on the Continent has the
superstition of the English labourer respecting white bread. But
the nourishment of the Tuscan peasant, according to Sismondi, "is
wholesome and various: its basis is an excellent wheaten bread,
brown, but pure from bran and from all mixture." "Dans la
mauvaise saison, il ne fait que deux repas par. jour. à dix
heures du matin il mange sa pollenta, à l'entrée de la nuit il
mange la soupe, puis du pain avec quelque assaisonnement
(companatico). En été il fait trois repas, à huit heures, à une
heure, et au soir, mais il n'allume de feu qu'une seule fois par
jour, pour son diner, qui se compose de soupe, puis d'un plat ou
de viande salée ou de poisson sec, ou de haricots, ou d'herbages,
qu'il mange avec du pain. La viande salée n'entre que pour une
quantité bien minime dans cet ordinaire, car il estime que
quarante livres de porc salé par individu suffisent amplement à
sa provision de l'année; il en met deux fois par semaine un petit
morceau dans son potage. Le dimanche il a toujours sur sa table
un plat de viande fraiche, mais un morceau qui ne pèse qu'une
livre ou une livre et demie suffit à toute la famille, quelque
nombreuse qu'elle soit. Il ne faut point oublier que le paysan
Toscan récolte en général de l'huile d'olive pour son usage: il
s'en sert, non seulement pour s'éclairer, mais pour assaisonner
tous les végétaux qu'il apprête pour sa table, et qui deviennent
ainsi bien plus savoureux et plus nutritifs. A déjeuner il mange
du pain, et quelquefois du fromage et des fruits; à souper, du
pain et de la salade. Sa boisson se compose du vin inférieur du
pays, et de la vinelle ou piquette fait d'eau fermentée sur le
marc du raisin. Il réserve cependant toujours quelque peu de son
meilleur vin pour le jour où il battra son grain, et pour
quelques fêtes qui se célébrent en famille. Il estime à dix
barils de vinelle par année (environ cinquante bouteilles) et à
cinq sacs de froment (environ mille livres de pain) la portion
requise pour un homme fait."
    The remarks of Sismondi on the moral influences of this state
of society are not less worthy of attention. The rights and
obligations of the metayer being fixed by usage, and all taxes
and rates heing paid by the proprietor, "le métayer a les
avantages de la propriété sans l'inconvénient de la défendre.
C'est au propriétaire qu'avec la terre appartient la guerre: pour
lui il vit en paix avec tous ses voisins; il n'a à leur égard
aucun motif de rivalité ou de défiance; il conserve la bonne
harmonie avec eux, comme avec son maitre, avec le fisc et avec
l'église: il vend peu, il achète peu, il touche peu d'argent,
mais personne ne lui en demande. On a souvent parlé du caractère
doux et bienveillant des Toscans, mais on n'a point assez
remarqué la cause qui a le plus contribué à préserver cette
douceur; c'est celle qui a soustrait tous les agriculteurs,
formant plus des trois quarts de la population, à presque toute
occasion de querelle." The fixity of tenure which the metayer, so
long as he fulfils his known obligations, possesses by usage,
though not by law, gives him the local attachments, and almost
the strong sense of personal interest, characteristic of a
proprietor. "Le métayer vit sur sa métairie comme sur son
héritage, l'aimant d'affection, travaillant à la bonifier sans
cesse, se confiant dans l'avenir, et comptant bien que ses champs
seront travaillés après lui par ses enfans et les enfans de ses
enfans. En effet, le plus grand nomhre des métayers vivent de
génération en génération sur la même terre; ils la connaissent en
détail avec une précision que le sentiment seul de la propriété
peut donner... Les champs élevés en terrasses les uns au-dessus
des autres n'ont souvent pas plus de quatre pieds de largeur,
mais il n'y en a pas un dont le métayer n'ait étudié en quelque
sorte le caractère. Celui-ci est sec, celui-là froid et humide;
ici la terre est profonde, là ce n'est qu'une croûte qui couvre à
peine le roc; le froment prospère mieux sur l'un, le seigle sur
i'autre; ici ce serait peine perdue de semer du blé de Turquie,
ailleurs la terre se refuse aux fèves et aux lupins, plus loin le
lin viendra à merveille, et le bord de ce ruisseau sera propre au
chanvre: ainsi l'on apprend du métayer, avec étonnement, que dans
une espace de dix arpens, le sol, les aspects, et l'inclinaison
du terrain, présentent plus de variété qu'un riche fermier n'en
sait en général distinguer dans une ferme de cinq cents acres
d'étendue. C'est que le dernier sent qu'il n'est là que de
passage, que de plus il doit se conduire par des règles
générales, et negliger les détails. Mais le métayer, avec
l'expérience du passé, a senti son intelligence éveillée par
l'intérêt et l'affection pour devenir le meilleur des
observateurs, et avec tout l'avenir devant lui, il ne songe pas à
lui seulement, mais à ses enfans et à ses petits enfans. Aussi
lorsqu'il plante l'olivier, arbre séculaire, et qu'il ménage au
fond du creux qu'il fait pour lui un écoulement aux eaux qui
pourraient lui nuire, il étudie toutes les couches de terrain
qu'il est appelé à défoncer." (25*)

    4. I do not offer these quotations as evidence of the
intrinsic excellence of the metayer system; but they surely
suffice to prove that neither "land miserably cultivated" nor a
people in "the most abject poverty" have any necessary connexion
with it, and that the unmeasured vituperation lavished upon the
system by English writers, is grounded on an extremely narrow
view of the subject. I look upon the rural economy of italy as
simply so much additional evidence in favour of small occupations
with permanent tenure. it is an example of what can he
accomplished by those two elements, even under the disadvantage
of the peculiar nature of the metayer contract, in which the
motives to exertion on the part of the tenant are only half as
strong as if he farmed the land on the same footing of perpetuity
at a money-rent, either fixed, or varying according to some rule
which would leave to the tenant the whole benefit of his own
exertions. The metayer tenure is not one which we should he
anxious to introduce where the exigencies of society had not
naturally given birth to it; but neither ought we to be eager to
abolish it on a mere à priori view of its disadvantages. If the
system in Tuscany works as well in practice as it is represented
to do, with every appearance of minute knowledge, by so competent
an authority as Sismondi; if the mode of living of the people,
and the size of farms, have for ages maintained and still
maintain themselves(26*) such as they are said to be by him, it
were to be recetted that a state of rural well-being so much
beyond what is realized in most European countries, should be put
to hazard by an attempt to introduce, under the guise of
agricultural improvement, a system of money-rents and capitalist
farmers. Even where the metayers are poor, and the subdivision
great, it is not to be assumed as of course, that the change
would be for the better. The enlargement of farms, and the
introduction of what are called improvements, usually diminish
the number of labourers employed on the land; and unless the
growth of capital in trade and manufactures affords an opening
for the displaced population, or unless there are reclaimable
wastes on which they can be located, competition will so reduce
wages, that they will probably be worse off as day-labourers than
they were as metayers.
    Mr. Jones very properly objects against the French Economists
of the last century, that in pursuing their favourite object of
introducing moneyrents, they turned their minds solely to putting
farmers in the place of metayers, instead of transforming the
existing metayers into farmers; which, as he justly renmarks, can
scarcely be effected, unless, to enable the metayers to save and
become owners of stock, the proprietors submit for a considerable
time to a diminution of income, instead of expecting an increase
of it, which has generally been their immediate motive for making
the attempt. if this transformation were effected, and no other
change made in the metayer's condition; if, preserving all the
other rights which usage insures to him, he merely got rid of the
landlord's claim to half the produce, paying in lieu of it a
moderate fixed rent; he would be so far in a better position than
at present, as the whole, instead of only half the fruits of any
improvement he made, would now belong to himself; but even so,
the benefit would not be without alloy. for a metayer, though not
himself a capitalist, has a capitalist for his partner, and has
the use, in Italy at least, of a considerable capital, as is
proved by the excellence of the farm buildings: and it is not
probable that the landowners would any longer consent to peril
their moveable property on the hazards of aagrcultural
enterprise, when assured of a fixed money income without it. Thus
would the question stand, even if the change left undisturbed the
metayer's virtual fixity of tenure, and converted him, in fact,
into a peasant proprietor at a quitrent. But if we suppose him
converted into a mere tenant, displaceable at the landlord's
will, and liable to have his rent raised by competition to any
amount which any unfortunate being in search of subsistence can
be found to offer or promise for it; he would lose all the
features in his condition which preserve it from being
deteriorated; he would be cast down from his present position of
a kind of half proprietor of the land, and would sink into a
cottier tenant.

NOTES:

1. In France before the Revolution, according to Arthur Young (i.
403) there was great local diversity in this respect. In
Champagne "the landlord commonly finds half the cattle and half
the seed, and the metayer, labour, implements, and taxes; but in
some districts the landlord bears a share of these. In
Roussillon, the landlord pays half the taxes; and in Guienne,
from Auch to Fleuran, many landlords pay all. Near Aguillon, on
the Garonne, the metayers furnish half the cattle. At Nangis, in
the Isle of France, I met with an agreement for the landlord to
furnish live stock, implements, harness, and taxes; the metayer
found labour and his own capitation tax: the landlord repaired
the house and gates; the metayer the windows: the landlord
provided seed the first year, the metayer the last; in the
intervening years they supply half and half. In the Bourbonnois
the landlord finds all sorts of live stock, yet the metayer
sells, changes, and buys at his will; the steward keeping an
account of these mutations, for the landlord has half the product
of sales, and pays half the purchases." In Piedmont, he says,
"the landlord commonly pays the taxes and repairs the buildings,
and the tenant provides cattle, implements, and seed." (II. 151) 

2. Etydes sur l'Economie Politiqtue, 6me essai: De la Condition
des Cultivateurs en Toscane.

3. Letters from Italy. I quote from Dr. Rigby's translation (p.
22).

4. This virtual fixity of tenure is not however universal even in
Italy; and it is absence that Sismondi attributes the inferior
condition of the metayers in to its some provinces of Naples, in
Lucca, and in the Riviera of Genoa; where the landlords obtain a
larger (though still a fixed) share of the produce. In those
countries the cultivation is splendid, but the people wretchedly
poor. "The same misfortune would probably have befallen the
people of Tuscany if public opinion did not protect the
cultivator; but a proprietor would not dare to impose
condiditions unusual in the country, and even in changing one
metayer for another he alters nothing in the terms of the
engagement." Nouveaux Principes, liv. iii. ch. 5.

5. M. Bastiat affirms that even in France, incontestably the
least favourable example of the metayer system, its effect in
repressing population is conspicuous.
    Un fait bien constate, c'est que la tendance a une
multiplication desordonnee se manifeste principalement au sein de
cette classe d'hommes qui vit de salaires. Cette prevoyance qui
retarde les mariages a sur elle peu d'empire, parce que les maux
qui resultent de l'exces de concurrence ne lui apparaissent que
tres-confusement, et dans un lointain en apparence peu
redoutable. C'est donc la circonstance la plus favorable pour un
pays d'etre organise de maniere a exclure le salariat. Dans les
pays de metairies, les mariages sont determines principalement
par les besoins de la culture; ils se multiplient quand, par
quelque circonstance, les metairies offrent des vides nuisibles
aux travaux; ils se ralentissent quand les places sont remplies.
Ici, un etat de choses facile a constater, savoir, le rapport
entre l'etendue du domaine et le nombre des bras, opere comme la
prevoyance et plus surement qu'elle. Aussi voyons-nous que si
aucune circonstance n'intervient pour ouvrir des debouches a une
population surnumeraire, elle demeure stationnaire. Nos
departements meridionaux en sont la preuve." -- Considerations
sur le Metayage, Journal des Economistes for February 1846.

6. Wealth of Nations, book iii. ch. 2.

7. Travels, vol. i. pp. 404-5.

8. Ibid. ii. 151-3.

9. Ibid. 217.

10. Principles of Political Economy, 3rd ed. p. 471.

11. Essay on the Distribution of Wealth, pp. 102-4.

12. M. de Tracy is partially an exception, inasmuch as his
experience reaches lower dowvn than the revolutionary period; but
he admits (as Mr. Jones has himself stated in another place) that
he is acquainted only with a limited district, of great
subdivision and unfertile soil.
    M. Passy is of opinion, that a French peasantry must be in
indigence and the country badly cultivated on a metayer system,
because the proportion of the produce claimable by the landlord
is too high; it being only in more favourable climates that any
land, not of the most exuberant fertility, can pay half its gross
produce in rent, and leave enough to peasant farmers to enable
them to grow successfully the more expensive and valuable
products of agriculture. (Systemes de Culture, p. 35) This is an
objection only to a particular numerical proportion, which is
indeed the common one, but is not essential to the system.

13. See the "Memoire sur la Surcharge des Impositions
qu'eprouvait la Generalite de Limoges, adresse au Conseil d'Etat
en 1766," pp. 260-304 of the fourth volume of Turgot's Works. The
occasional engagements of landlords (as mentioned by Arthur
Young) to pay a part of the taxes, were according to Turgot, of
recent origin, under the compulsion of actual necessity. "Le
proprietaire ne s'y prete qu'autant qu'il ne peut trouver de
metayer autrement; ainsi, meme dans ce cas-la, le metayer est
toujours reduit a ce qu'il faut precisement pour ne pas mourir de
faim." (p. 275)

14. Vol. i. p. 404.

15. letters from Italy, translated by Rigby, p. 16

16. Ibid. pp. 19, 20.

17. Ibid. pp. 24-31.

18. Pp. 78-9.

19. Pp. 73-6.

20. Travels, vol ii. p. 156.

21. Letters from Italy, p. 75.

22. Ibid, pp. 295-6.

23. From his Sixth Essay, formerly refered to.

24. "Inventaire du trousseau de Jeanne, fille de Valene Papini, a
son mariage avec Giovacchino Landi, le 29 Avril 1835, a Porta
Vecchia, pre Pescia:
    "28 chemises, 3 robes de bourre de soie en couleur, 4 robes
de fleuret de soie en couleur, 7 robes d'indienne ou toile de
coton, 2 robes de travail d'hiver (mezza lana), 3 robes et jupons
de travail d'ete (mola), 3jupes blanches, 5 tabliers de toile
peinte, 1 tablier de soie noir, 1 tablier de merinos noir, 9
tabliers de travail (mola) en couleur, 4 mouchoirs blancs, 8
mouchoirs en couleur, 3 mouchoirs de soie, 2 voiles brodes et 1
voile de tulle, 3 essuie-mains, 14 paires de bas, 2 chapeaux,
l'un de feutre, l'autre de paille fine: 2 camees d'or, 2 boucles
d'oreilles en or, 1 chapelet avec deux piastres romaines, 1
collier de corail avec sa croix d'or... Toutes les epouses plus
riches ont de plus la veste di seta, la grande robe de toilette,
de soie, qu'elles ne portent que quatre ou cinq fois dans leur
vie.
    "Les hommes n'ont point de trousseaux; l'epoux en se mariant
n'avait que 14 chemises, et la reste en proportion. Il n'a
encoure a present que 13 paires de draps, tandis que dans la
famille de sa femme il y en a 30 paires."

25. Of the intelligence of this interesting people, M. de
Sismondi speaks in the most favourable terms. Few of them can
read; but there is often one member of the family destined for
the priesthood, who reads to them on winter evening. Their
language differs little from the purest Italian. The taste for
improvisaion in verse is general. "Les paysans du val de Nievole
frequentant le spectacle les jours de fete, en ete, de neuf a
onze heures du soir: leur admission ne leur coute guere que cinq
sols de France. Alfieri est leur auteur de prediliction; toute
l'histoire des Atrides est familiere a ces hommes que ne savent
pas lire, et qui vont demander a ce poete austere un delassement
de leurs rudes traveaux." Unlike most rustics, they find pleasure
in the beauty of the country. "Dans les collines du val de
Nievole on trouve devant chaque maison, l'aire pour battre le
ble, qui a rarement plus de vingt-cinq a trente toises carrees,
c'est le plus souvent le seul espace de niveau qu'on recontre
dans toute le metarie. En meme temps c'est une terrasse qui
domine les plaines et al vallee, et d'ou la vue s'etend sur un
pays ravissant. Presque jamais je ne m'y suis arrete pour
l'admirer, sans que le metayer soit venu jouir de mon admiration,
et m'indiquer du doigt les beautes qu'il croyait pouvoir m'avoir
echappe."

26. "On ne voit jamais," says Sismondi, "une famille de metayers
proposer a son maitre de partager sa metairie, a moins que le
travail ne soit reellement superieur a ses forces, et qu'elle ne
sente la certitude de conserver les memes jouissances sur un
moindre espace de terrain. On ne voit jamais dans une famille
plusieurs fils se marier en meme temps,et former autant de
menages nouveaux; un seul prend une femme et se charge des soins
du menage; aucun de ses freres ne se marie, a moins que lui-meme
n'ait pas d'enfans, ou que l'on n'offre a cet autre frere une
nouvelle metaire." -- Nouveaux Principes, liv, iii. chap. 5.

